QTLRel
======

QTLRel is an [R](http://www.r-project.org) package for mapping
quantitative trait loci (QTLs) in experimental crosses such as
advanced intercross lines (AILs) where relatedness among individuals
should not be ignored. QTLRel includes functions to estimate
background genetic variance components, impute missing genotypes,
simulate genotypes, perform a genome scan for quantitative trait loci,
and plot the mapping results. QTLRel also includes functions to
efficiently calculate Jacquard condensed identity coefficients. Many
of these functions are similar to the functions in
[R/qtl](http://github.com/kbroman/qtl), although many of the functions
with similar names have different usage, and may generate different
results.

This R package implements the methods described in

> Cheng R, Lim J E, Samocha K E, Sokoloff G, Abney M, Skol A D,
> Palmer A A (2010).
> [Genome-wide association studies and the problem of relatedness
among advanced intercross lines and other highly recombinant
populations](http://dx.doi.org/10.1534/genetics.110.116863)
> *Genetics* 185(3): 1033â€“1044.

If you find this software useful for your project, we request that you
cite the *Genetics* (2010) paper above, and the more recent paper
published in *BMC Genetics*:

> Cheng R, Abney M, Palmer A A, Skol A D (2011). [QTLRel: an R
package for genome-wide association studies in which relatedness is a
concern](http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2156-12-66).
> *BMC Genetics* 12(1): 66. 

### License

QTLRel is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the
[GNU General Public License](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html) as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
**without any warranty**; without even the implied warranty of
**merchantability** of **fitness for a particular purpose**. See
[LICENSE](LICENSE) for more details.

### Installation

There are two ways to install the QTLRel package for R.

The easiest way is to use the R command line. This installs QTLRel
stored at [CRAN](http://cran.r-project.org). Simply enter 
**install.packages("QTLRel")** in R, and once the package is
successfully installed on your computer, load the package using
command **library(QTLRel)**. Bear in mind that the version of the
package kept on CRAN may not be completely up-to-date.

Alternatively, you may download the source code directly from github,
and install the package from the source code. Installing QTLRel in
this way involves a couple more steps (unless you happen to have
[devtools](http://github.com/hadley/devtools)), but ensures that you
have the most recent version. First, fork or clone the repository on
your computer, or [download the repository as a ZIP
archive](http://github.com/pcarbo/QTLRel/archive/master.zip). Once you
have expanded the files in the ZIP archive, build the package from the
command line on your computer (not the R shell) with the following two
commands:

    R CMD check qtlreldir
    R CMD build qtlreldir

where **qtlreldir** is the folder containing the files you downloaded
from github. (To complete these steps successfully, you may have to
install the [gdata package](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gdata)
first.) Once the package is built, a file will be created with a name
something like **QTLRel_0.2-12.tar.gz**. Finally, to install the
package, run the following command in the console:

    R CMD INSTALL QTLRel_0.2-12.tar.gz

You will now be able to load the QTLRel library in R.

### More information

All the R functions in the QTLRel package are documented; for example,
to get a description of the scanOne function, type **help(scanOne)**
in R. To get a list of all the available functions in QTLRel, type
either **library(help=QTLRel)** or **help(package=QTLRel)** in R.

See [here](inst/doc/QTLRel_Tutorial.pdf) for a tutorial explaining how
to use QTLRel for QTL mapping in experimental crosses.

Also, the [lgsmfear](http://github.com/pcarbo/lgsmfear) project repository
contains a detailed working example showing how QTLRel can be used to
map quantitative trait loci in an advanced intercross line.

Note that the code was recently modified to allow individuals in the
pedigree to have only one parent (this corresponds to
self-fertilization, or selfing). Since calculation of the identity
coefficients assumes that the founders are not inbred, removing the
constraint that an individual must have two parents permits inbred
founders to be defined artificially through iterated selfing. This is
demonstrated in the [lgsmfear](http://github.com/pcarbo/lgsmfear)
project.

### Credits

The QTLRel package for R was originally developed by
[Riyan Cheng](http://borevitzlab.anu.edu.au/borevitz-lab-people/riyan-chang)
for [Abraham Palmer's lab](http://palmerlab.org) at the
[University of Chicago](http://www.uchicago.edu).
